Data Analyst and Related Job Roles

In this reading, we will cover the role of a Data Analyst, how it differs by industry and function, and some related roles and job titles.
Learning Objectives

After completing this reading, you will be able to:

    Describe the role of a Data Analyst

    List several industries that employ Data Analysts, indicate the types of tasks they perform in those industries, and provide examples of how the role can vary by industry

    List several functions that Data Analysts work in, the types of tasks they perform, and exemplify how the role can vary between them

    List several job roles and titles that involve responsibilities similar to that of a Data Analyst

Data Analyst’s Role

The role of a Data Analyst involves acquiring data, integrating, and organizing it, cleaning, and validating it, and making sense of it by applying statistical techniques. Data Analysts find patterns in data that can help solve real-world problems. They employ a variety of skills and tools to model and visualize the data, which helps them build a coherent story to communicate their insights to stakeholders. The job of a Data Analyst can vary based on the industry and the function/department/division they work in.

Industry Sectors That Employ Data Analysts

Data Analysts are in high demand across various industries, given their increasingly important role in gathering insights from data and enabling informed decision-making. Some of the industries where data analysts are commonly employed and the types of tasks they assist within those sectors include:

    Financial services – understand market trends, identify investment opportunities and risks

    Retail – analyze consumer behavior, optimize inventories, and provide personalized experiences

    Manufacturing – optimize supply chain management, improve operations & processes

    Healthcare – improve patient outcomes, optimize resources, reduce costs

    Information Technology (IT) - improve user experience, identify bugs, streamline data center operations

    Government – identify economic indicators and trends, support policy-making decisions

In all industries that data analysts work in, having or acquiring domain knowledge can make them more valuable. Understanding how systems and processes work helps diagnose problems and validate results. For example, if you are working with medical device data, you might find it helpful to understand something about the pathologies your team is trying to detect or characterize. If you are working with IoT data to detect problems in a manufacturing process, you may need to understand aspects of the process and how failures can occur.
Functions That Employ Data Analysts

Data Analysts can play an essential role in every division or function in an organization that requires data-driven analysis and decision-making. Some of the departments that Data Analysts play a pivotal role in and the types of tasks they assist with include:  

    Marketing – analyze consumer behavior, identify target segments, measure campaign effectiveness

    Sales – analyze competitive landscape, summarize sales data, forecast future sales, prioritize sales opportunities

    Finance – budgeting, analyzing financial performance, investment decisions, assessing risks

    Operations - identify bottlenecks, improve processes, reduce defects, optimize inventory costs

    Research & Development – market research, evaluate research outcomes, analyze data generated by research projects

    Human Resources (HR) - analyze employee performance, reduce turnover, improve talent management

Functional expertise in your industry also yields greater insights into analyses. Functional expertise provides a backdrop for making data interpretations actionable. For example, as an analyst working for a hospital system, you may have inside knowledge regarding the protocols with patient care that can help you fill in patient data gaps in a clinical study conducted at the hospital. Or, say, you are analyzing financial data for the costs of a construction project to make a bid on it. Knowing your company’s process may help identify costs that could be avoided in that estimate, making your bid lower than others. 
Related Job Roles

Data analysis can play a significant role in several job roles and titles. However, in addition to involving basic data analytics capabilities, they may require additional or specialized skills and tools related to their role. Therefore, for those starting out in a data analytics role, it is useful to look for job postings with the “Data Analyst” title and explore other roles similar to those listed below. Don’t let the title of a job post deter you if the description seems like a good fit. You might find a great match with the job by looking beyond the titles and considering the roles and responsibilities described in specific job postings.

It does not mean you will be qualified for each of these roles with just your core data analytics skills. Still, there could be opportunities to leverage if you have some experience with the specific domains or could grow your career by developing additional skills and knowledge if interested. Let’s look at two broad categories of related roles:

    Roles with “Analyst” in the title

    Roles without “Analyst” in the title

Related “Analyst” Roles

These job titles include Operations Analyst, Social Media Analyst, Business Analyst, Business Intelligence Analyst, Marketing Analyst, and Financial Analyst. Let’s describe these roles briefly and the specific tasks they involve:

    Operations Analysts

An operations analyst uses data to evaluate the efficiency of business processes such as workflows, line production, supply chain management, and customer service procedures and then recommends areas for improvement. 

    Social Media Analysts

Social media analysts work with social media metrics to determine the success of social media campaigns or suggest changes based on how consumers have responded to them. They build marketing strategies by analyzing user engagement with web analytics. They influence an organization’s social media policies with their knowledge of social media platforms and analysis of data collected from the campaigns. They use tools like Sprout Social, Hootsuite, and Google Analytics. 

    Business Analysts

Business analysts (BA) help businesses make data-driven decisions like data analysts. The BA role focuses on reviewing and improving business by interviewing team members, creating financial models and visualizations, and training and coaching staff to implement new systems. They use data to evaluate an organization’s functions and structures and make recommendations to enhance growth or facilitate change.

    Financial Analysts

Financial analysts analyze financial data to increase profit or mitigate loss. They analyze revenue variations and determine how to attribute them to specific initiatives. The company may try to understand revenue fluctuations by dissecting financial data. They also assist with budgeting and forecasting and help the company plan. 

    Business Intelligence Analysts

Business intelligence (BI) analysts are sometimes confused with business analysts. BI analysts are a hybrid role of both a data analyst and a business analyst. They typically use business data from marketing, sales, and apps to create data visualizations and reports to provide insights and recommend business solutions. The BI analyst’s primary objectives are to maximize profit or stimulate growth for the company. 

    Marketing Analysts

Marketing analysts deal with initiatives run by the marketing department. Analytical business initiatives include working with advertisement data, social media campaigns, email campaigns, blog posts, and webinar events, exploring and evaluating target audiences, and attracting traffic to the company’s websites. Sometimes it is necessary to look for patterns across initiatives as well. 
Other Related Roles

Because of the variety of responsibilities a data analyst’s job can take, you will encounter many job postings with alternative job titles that don’t have the “Analyst” title in them. For example, consider the significant overlap amongst the various roles played within a data science team and how you might fit in as a contributor. 

Here are some examples of titles related to a data analyst to look out for:  

    Algorithm Developer 

    Analytics Consultant

    Analytics Specialist

    BI Developer

    Data Interpreter

    Data Processor

    Data Scientist

    Data Specialist

    Data Visualization Specialist

    Machine Learning Developer

    Machine Learning Engineer

    Statistician

    Actuary

Summary

    A Data Analyst acquires, integrates, organizes, cleanses, validates, analyzes, and visualizes data to uncover insights and communicate them to stakeholders.

    Data Analysts are employed in virtually every industry and play an important role in Healthcare, Financial Services, Retail, Manufacturing, IT, and Government sectors.

    Data Analysts work in various organizational functions, including Marketing, Sales, Finance, Operations, Research, and HR.

    Organizations may have different titles for roles similar to that of a Data Analyst, such as BI Analyst, Operations Analyst, Financial Analyst, Marketing Analyst, etc.. They may require additional specialized skills beyond general data analysis.

    Other related job roles that may involve data analytics skills include Statistician, Data Scientist, Data Engineer, Analytics Consultant, etc.